London. A Street.

Enter GLOUCESTER.

Now is the winter of our discontent	 
Made glorious summer by this sun of York;	   4
And all the clouds that lour upon our house	 
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.	 
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;	 
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;	   8
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings;	 
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.	 
Grim-visag war hath smooth his wrinkled front;	 
And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds,	  12
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,? 
He capers nimbly in a lady chamber	 
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.	 
But I, that am not shap for sportive tricks,	  16
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;	 
I, that am rudely stamp, and want love majesty	 
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;	 
I, that am curtail of this fair proportion,	  20
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,	 
Deform, unfinish, sent before my time	 
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,	 
And that so lamely and unfashionable	  24
That dogs bark at me, as I halt by them;	 
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,	 
Have no delight to pass away the time,	 
Unless to see my shadow in the sun	  28
And descant on mine own deformity:	 
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,	 
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,	 
I am determined to prove a villain,	  32
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.	 
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,	 
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,	 
To set my brother Clarence and the king	  36
In deadly hate the one against the other:	 
And if King Edward be as true and just	 
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,	 
This day should Clarence closely be mew’d up,	  40
About a prophecy, which says, that G	 
Of Edward heirs the murderer shall be.	 
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here Clarence comes.	 

Enter CLARENCE, guarded, and BRAKENBURY.	44

Brother, good day: what means this armed guard	 
That waits upon your Grace?	 
His majesty,	 
Tendering my person safety, hath appointed	  48
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.	 
Upon what cause?
Because my name is George.
Alack! my lord, that fault is none of yours;	  52
He should, for that, commit your godfathers.	 
O! belike his majesty hath some intent	 
That you should be new-christen in the Tower.	 
But what the matter, Clarence? may I know?	  56
Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest	 
As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,	 
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams;	 
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G,	  60
And says a wizard told him that by G	 
His issue disinherited should be;	 
And, for my name of George begins with G,	 
It follows in his thought that I am he.	  64
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these,	 
Have move his highness to commit me now.	 
Why, this it is, when men are rulby women:	 
is not the king that sends you to the Tower;	  68
My Lady Grey, his wife, Clarence, is she	 
That tempers him to this extremity.	 
Was it not she and that good man of worship,	 
Antony Woodville, her brother there,	  72
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,	 
From whence this present day he is deliver’d?	 
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.	 
By heaven, I think there is no man secure	  76
But the queen kindred and night-walking heralds	 
That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.	 
Heard you not what a humble suppliant	 
Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?	  80
Humbly complaining to her deity	 
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.	 
l tell you what; I think it is our way,	 
If we will keep in favour with the king,	  84
To be her men and wear her livery:	 
The jealous or-worn widow and herself,	 
Since that our brother dubb them gentlewomen,	 
Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.	  88
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me;	 
His majesty hath straitly given in charge	 
That no man shall have private conference,	 
Of what degree soever, with your brother.	  92
Even so; an please your worship, Brakenbury,	 
You may partake of anything we say:	 
We speak no treason, man: we say the king	 
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen	  96
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;	 
We say that Shore wife hath a pretty foot,	 
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;	 
And that the queen kindred are made gentlefolks.	 100
How say you, sir? can you deny all this?	 
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.	 
Naught to do with Mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,	 
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,	 104
Were best to do it secretly, alone.	 
What one, my lord?	 
Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?	 
I beseech your Grace to pardon me; and withal	 108
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.	 
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.	 
We are the queen abjects, and must obey.	 
Brother, farewell: I will unto the king;	 112
And whatsoever you will employ me in,	 
Were it to call King Edward widow sister,	 
I will perform it to enfranchise you.	 
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood	 116
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.	 
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.	 
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;	 
I will deliver you, or else lie for you:	 120
Meantime, have patience.	 
I must perforce: farewell.	 
Go, tread the path that thou shalt ner return,	 
Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so	 124
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,	 
If heaven will take the present at our hands.	 
But who comes here? the new-deliver Hastings!	 

Enter HASTINGS.	128

Good time of day unto my gracious lord!	 
As much unto my good lord chamberlain!	 
Well are you welcome to this open air.	 
How hath your lordship brook imprisonment?	 132
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:	 
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks	 
That were the cause of my imprisonment.	 
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;	 136
For they that were your enemies are his,	 
And have prevail as much on him as you.	 
More pity that the eagles should be mew,	 
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.	 140
What news abroad?	 
No news so bad abroad as this at home;	 
The king is sickly, weak, and melancholy,	 
And his physicians fear him mightily.	 144
Now by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed.	 
O! he hath kept an evil diet long,	 
And over-much consum his royal person:	 
is very grievous to be thought upon.	 148
What, is he in his bed?	 
He is.	 
Go you before, and I will follow you.	 
He cannot live, I hope; and must not die    152
Till George be pack with post-horse up to heaven.	 
l'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,	 
With lies well steel with weighty arguments;	 
And, if I fail not in my deep intent,	 156
Clarence hath not another day to live:	 
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,	 
And leave the world for me to bustle in!	 
For then I'll marry Warwick youngest daughter.	 160
What though I kill her husband and her father,	 
The readiest way to make the wench amends	 
Is to become her husband and her father:	 
The which will I; not all so much for love	 164
As for another secret close intent,	 
By marrying her, which I must reach unto.	 
But yet I run before my horse to market:	 
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns:	 168
When they are gone, then must I count my gains. 